Okay, well, the titles on the slides show
only one aspect of our lives.
For the over past year now,
David and I have been more than a
utility infielder and a word wrangler.
We've been leading secret lives.
In fact, we've been book authors.
Today's session... Thank you.
Everything that we talk about
today will be in the book that
we released earlier this year,
Programming with Quartz.
In fact,
the book contains a lot more than
what we're going to talk about today.
It's a comprehensive guide to Quartz,
and it contains a lot of code examples,
all of which are available for download.
But I'll tell you a lot more
about the book later on.
I'm going to start off the session,
and David's going to return later.
In this session,
you'll learn what Quartz is.
You'll also learn the fundamental
concepts that are necessary to
use the Quartz 2D API effectively.
But most of the session,
David and I will show you how to use the
Quartz 2D API to accomplish these tasks.
All of the code that you see today
is in the Quartz 2D basic sample
application that's available for download
on the WWDC site for this session.
We'll wrap up the session
by showing you some of the
advanced capabilities of Quartz.
And then we'll conclude by giving
you some tips for how you can get
started as a Quartz programmer.
Now Quartz has many facets.
It's really a catch-all term
that's used to describe most
of the graphics technologies
that are available in Mac OS X.
In the beginning of Mac OS X,
Quartz referred to the windowing
system and the 2D drawing engine.
The Quartz 2D API at that time supported
2D drawing and display management.
But with each release
of the operating system,
more and more capabilities
have been added to Quartz.
For example,
the image handling capabilities
have grown with each release,
and today it's almost trivial to read
an image data and to export it out.
With Tiger, in addition to the advanced
image handling capabilities,
a number of other Quartz
technologies were introduced,
including Core Image,
which is the image processing API,
Core Video,
which is an API that allows you to
get frame-level access to video,
and Quartz Composer,
which brings together a number of
Mac OS X technologies in a graphical
programming environment that you
can use to create motion graphics.
And PDFKit, which supports opening,
viewing, and searching PDF documents
in an application.
And with Leopard, you've heard about two
other Quartz technologies.
Core animation that allows you to
render layers and animate those
layers so that you can create
front-row style applications.
And ImageKit,
which supports user interface elements
for image views so that your users can
view and edit images and also get access
to core image filters and to use them.
Today's talk, however,
focuses solely on Quartz 2D.
So let me go over a few of the features.
Device independence.
This means that when you draw on Quartz,
you don't have to think of the
device that you're drawing to.
Quartz takes care of the details for you.
Quartz will map coordinates,
match colors, and if necessary,
convert pixel formats and do
anything else that's necessary to
convert your drawing to the device.
Quartz is resolution independent.
Its coordinate space is in units,
not pixels.
When you draw,
Quartz makes sure that your drawing
output is at the optimal resolution
for the device that you're drawing to.
Quartz is high performance in
that it leverages the graphics
hardware whenever it can.
It has fully anti-alias
graphics and text.
It supports alpha transparency,
which you'll see more about in a moment.
And it has built-in PDF support.
PDF, in fact,
is a metafile format for Quartz.
And because of that,
Quartz drawing can be fully
captured in PDF without the need
to downsample or to compress.
And this is really important too.
Quartz is the gateway to using
other graphics technologies.
Quartz images, for example,
can be used in Core Image.
And Core Image and other
technologies use Quartz colors.
So where is Quartz 2D?
First of all,
I'd like to see how many of you are
new to the Mac platform or to WWDC.
Okay, so as you go on this week,
you may see here that Core Graphics
is used as a synonym for Quartz 2D.
And that's because the Quartz
2D API is largely declared in
the Core Graphics framework.
The image handling capabilities are
declared in the Image.io framework.
And the diagram here that you see
gives you an idea of where Quartz
sits in relation to the other
graphics technologies in Mac OS X.
Just about any software that's
built for Mac OS X can use Quartz.
The Cocoa Drawing API is
built directly on Quartz 2D.
And in some cases,
Cocoa developers will want to
call the Quartz API directly,
either to get access to features
that might not be exposed
in the Cocoa Drawing API,
or to gain finer-grained control
over some of the features that
are needed for your program.
Now Carbon is the procedural
C API for Mac OS X,
and Quartz 2D is procedural as well.
In fact, Quartz 2D is the API to use in
Carbon applications if you want to draw.
You'll find C and C++
developers will find that it's
really easy to use this API.
Now Carbon is the procedural
C API for Mac OS X,
and Quartz 2D is procedural as well.
In fact, Quartz 2D is the API to use in
Carbon applications if you want to draw.
You'll find C and C++
developers will find that it's
really easy to use this API.
Now Carbon is the procedural
C API for Mac OS X,
and Quartz 2D is procedural as well.
In fact, Quartz 2D is the API to use in
Carbon applications if you want to draw.
You'll find C and C++
developers will find that it's
really easy to use this API.
The Quartz 2D API is organized
around opaque data types.
And there's a number
of opaque data types,
so I've chosen to show
you only a few here today.
Each opaque data type in
Quartz represents an object.
For example, the CG image ref data type
represents a Quartz image.
CG color ref represents a color object.
And the CG path ref data type
represents a path object.
Now you'll see how to use a
number of these opaque data
types and more today as we go on.
Now because Quartz has
its object-like flavor,
its API is designed with a
number of functions that create,
access, modify, use,
and more importantly,
reuse Quartz objects.
So here I've put some examples
of some of the functions that
are in the Quartz 2D API.
And as you can see,
it's a pretty well-designed API.
The function names are
pretty straightforward.
You can pretty much guess
what the functions do.
And the CG prefix
refers to core graphics.
Well, with any API that uses objects,
there are going to be some
rules for memory management,
and they're pretty simple.
If you create an object in Quartz,
you own it.
Owners must release all objects that they
create when they no longer need them.
If you don't own an object,
don't release it.
But if you want to keep an
object around that you don't own,
you need to retain it.
Quartz provides functions for many
of the opaque data types that will
retain and release that specific type,
as you can see for images.
But because Quartz opaque data
types are derived directly from
core foundation CF type data types,
you can also use the functions
CF retain and CF release.
The Quartz has a very
flexible coordinate system.
The Quartz coordinates
are floating point values.
And the origin is at the lower left.
X values increase from left to right,
and Y values increase from bottom to top.
Quartz provides a number of
functions that allow you to
operate on coordinate space.
Here I've listed three of the
simplest functions that you can use.
As you can see, you can change the scale
of the coordinates space.
You can turn or rotate
the coordinate space.
You can move or translate the origin.
For example, you can scale the space.
Okay,
let's take a look at the default again.
You can also concatenate
several operations together.
So for example,
you can flip the coordinate space by
translating and scaling X negatively.
Okay,
let's go back and look at the default.
If you look at the text on the woman's
shirt and the stain on her sleeve,
you'll see that indeed it's been flipped,
and that the origin is
now at the lower right,
and X values now go
increase from right to left.
You can also skew the space.
And by the way, if you want to know why
the woman is screaming,
you'll have to read our book.
The answer's in there.
Now, transforming space is very powerful
because it allows you to operate
on the space rather than having
to manipulate object coordinates.
So, for example,
if you want to make an object bigger and
draw it in a different part of the space,
it's much easier to transform the space.
Now, for example,
you can do really easy zooming that way.
Now Quartz 2D has a number of
graphics primitives as you might
expect in any 2D drawing library.
And as you might expect,
Quartz supports line art drawing.
You can create paths in Quartz,
and paths are made up
of lines and curves.
And the paths can be open, closed,
simple, complex.
You can draw just about any
arbitrary shape that you want.
Quartz supports a number
of image formats as well.
It supports JPEG, PNG, TIFF, GIF,
camera raw formats that can
contain multiple images.
You can create thumbnails and you
can load images incrementally.
Quartz provides a number of functions
for you to manipulate images,
for you to read an image
data and export it,
and even to create image masks.
And because PDF is the
metafile format for Quartz,
as you might expect,
the PDF is the first class
graphic primitive too.
You can just as easily create
PDF content as to draw it.
Now, Quartz has a number of
low-level text functions.
Now, these text functions are used
primarily by higher-level frameworks.
In this talk today,
we're not going to tell you anything
more about Quartz text functions.
In most cases,
applications either need more
sophisticated text layout and
rendering than what Quartz offers,
or they need something really simple,
like a text field.
So, if you need to support
text in your application,
I invite you to look at one
of the other Mac OS X APIs,
such as Cocoa Drawing or Quartz Text.
Okay, now Quartz uses a painter's model.
The painter's model is nothing new.
It's been around for hundreds of years,
used by such people as Rembrandt.
Now, just as in Rembrandt's time,
if you have paint that you want to
apply to the canvas like Rembrandt
did in our digital model here,
if you want to change any paint
that's on the virtual page,
the only way that you can do it is
to apply more paint on top of it.
So let's see how that works.
Here we have a gradient.
We have an image of a
rather nasty-looking cat,
and we have some text.
We have our blank canvas,
and we first draw the gradient,
then the text, then the cat.
You'll see that the drawing
order really matters,
and we have a result that isn't
quite as pleasing as if we change the
drawing order and draw our gradient,
our cat, and our text.
So as you can see,
you can create rather sophisticated
images in Quartz using a small
number of very powerful primitives.
Now Quartz also supports
alpha transparency.
Every color component in Quartz has
an alpha component attached to it.
And the alpha component of a color,
the value can range from 0 to 1.
1 means that that color
is completely opaque,
and 0 means that it's
completely transparent.
So let's see how this works.
I have my canvas,
I draw the image of my screaming woman,
and on top of it I'm going
to paint a red rectangle,
and the alpha value of
that red color is 1.
It's completely opaque,
so you cannot see the image underneath.
But if I change the alpha
value of the red color to 0.5,
you'll see that the image
underneath shows through.
And finally,
if I draw that rectangle using a
red color with an alpha value of 0,
it's as if I didn't draw
the rectangle at all.
Quartz also has the
notion of global alpha.
And global alpha is applied to
all the colors that are drawn.
So if the alpha value is 1,
that means that everything that's
drawn will be completely opaque.
Nothing is changed here.
So we can see in our image that our
image here looks just like it did on
the previous slides that I showed you.
But if we change the global alpha,
as we decrease the global alpha,
that image will dim until
finally when the value is zero,
you won't be able to
see the image at all.
It's as if I didn't draw it.
Now when you combine the notion
of alpha transparency with the
notion of the painter's model,
you'll see that what we really
have in Quartz is a watercolor
artist painter's model.
So you might think of someone like
Winslow Homer instead of Rembrandt.
Now, color management is the process
of ensuring consistent color
across peripheral devices,
such as displays or printers,
and across operating system platforms.
Now, Quartz, fortunately,
has built-in color management.
But let's take a look at what
a color-managed picture looks
like compared to one that's not.
As you can see,
the color-managed picture,
the colors exactly match
what's in the top image.
But in the one that's not color-managed,
there are striking differences.
One of them you can look at is
the color of the life vests.
But the water, the raft,
there are some striking
color differences there.
But fortunately in Quartz,
if you use the correct color functions,
which David will show
you how to do later,
you do not have to worry about this.
You will get color management for free.
Now, Quartz, one set of drawing commands
will draw to any destination.
Your drawing commands are
independent of the destination.
All you'd have to do is specify
your drawing and tell Quartz what
destination that you want to draw to.
Whether it's a window review, a printer,
a PDF or a bitmap,
the drawing commands are the same.
So how do you specify to Quartz which
destination that you want to draw to?
You do that with a graphics context,
which is represented by the
CG context rep data type.
A Quartz graphics context is an
abstract drawing destination.
There are several flavors of them.
There are graphics contexts
for on-screen drawing,
off-screen drawing, printing,
PDF documents.
So I'd like to show you how to create
some on-screen drawing contexts,
and later on,
David's going to show you how
to create some of the other
flavors of drawing contexts.
So let's start with Cocoa first.
So Cocoa programmers need to
obtain a Quartz graphics context
in the drawRect method for the
view that they want to draw to.
The first thing they need to do is
to call the current context method
of the NSGraphicsContext class to
obtain the Cocoa graphics context
associated with the current thread.
Now that's a Cocoa graphics context.
Quartz is at a much lower level,
so you need to extract the lower
level graphics context out of
the Cocoa graphics context,
and you do that by calling
the GraphicsPort method.
After you have the
Quartz graphics context,
you can then pass out to the
appropriate Quartz drawing functions.
That's all there is to it.
It's pretty easy.
Now, for Carbon developers,
it's just as easy.
First,
you install an event handler on the
HIVO object that you want to draw to.
Then, in your drawing event handler,
you call the Carbon event
manager function,
get event parameter,
to extract the Quartz graphics context.
And then you pass that context to the
appropriate Quartz drawing functions.
Now, the one caveat here is that the
window that's associated with
the HIVO that you're drawing to
must have compositing turned on.
But compositing is on by default,
so just make sure that
you don't turn it off.
Quartz maintains a graphic state,
and that state contains a lot
of parameters that control
exactly how drawing is done.
I've listed only a few
of the parameters here,
such as stroke color, fill color,
and any coordinate space transformations
that you apply to the coordinate space.
Now,
the other thing about Quartz's graphic
state is that it's stack-based.
And that means that you can save
a snapshot of the current state by
pushing it onto the graphics stack.
And you can push several snapshots
of the graphic state on if you want.
And you can return to previous states by
popping states from the graphics stack.
Now, the only way that you
can change parameters,
well, there's two ways that you can
actually have parameters change.
One is to set the value of a parameter,
and that parameter will stay set to
that value until you either set it to
a different value or until you restore
a graphic state to a previous value.
So let's see how working
with a graphics stack works.
works here.
Here I have my current graphic state.
And in it I have only two parameters,
the stroke color and the fill color.
Now, if I call the Quartz
function CGContextSaveGState,
what that does is it makes
a copy of the current state
and pushes it onto the stack,
and that copy now
becomes my current state.
Now any operations I do in changing the
parameters associated with that state,
such as the fill color,
operate on the current state.
I can go ahead and do drawing
and my fill color will be green.
If I want to revert back
to a previous state,
I simply call the function
CGContextRestoredGState and that
pops the state off the stack and
I revert to the previous one.
So graphic state management,
it's that easy.
Okay, enough talking about Quartz.
It's time to take a look at some code.
And I'm going to start with
filling and stroking a rectangle.
So here I put five of the
convenience functions that
Quartz offers for drawing shapes.
What I want you to notice about this
is that in each of these functions,
the first parameter
is a graphics context.
The second parameter is the
shape that you want to draw.
And for the case of the ellipse,
the rectangle defines the major
and minor axis of the ellipse.
Now one of the functions
takes a third parameter,
CGContextFillRex,
and that's a function that
will fill many rectangles.
The third parameter indicates
to Quartz how many rectangles
you're passing it to fill.
So let's take a look at a routine.
I'm going to step through
this line by line so you can
understand exactly what's going on.
The first thing I'm going to
do is to create a rectangle.
This is just an abstract rectangle.
No drawing will be done.
I'll call the function CG_rectmake,
and I'm going to provide the origin of
that rectangle and the width and height.
So here I've specified x equals 10,
y equals 10, and the width has 130 units,
and the height is 100 units.
Next, I want to set my fill color by
providing a color to Quartz,
the new fill color,
because by default the fill
color is black and it's not
going to show up very well here.
So I'm providing a blue color,
and I'm getting that color from
a function that David wrote,
my get blue color,
and David will show you how
to write this function later.
It's going to provide me a
color-managed blue color.
So, so far, no drawing's been done yet.
Now I'll call a function that
will actually fill the rectangle,
and this is my result.
Of course, the axes aren't drawn.
I put them there just to remind
you that the origin of the
rectangle is at X equals 10,
Y equals 10.
Okay, let's stroke that same rectangle.
So now I need to set a stroke color,
and I'm going to provide a green color,
again, using another function
that David's written.
And then I'm actually going to call a
function that will stroke the rectangle,
providing it a width of 10 units.
And this is my result.
So here's where I'd like to
take a little detour to show you
exactly how Quartz does stroking.
So a path is an abstract concept.
It's infinitely thin.
When you ask Quartz to stroke a path,
it applies paint such that
the paint straddles the path.
So in the case of my rectangular path,
the stroke is 10 units wide,
5 units of the paint will
be on one side of the path,
and 5 units will be on the other.
Now this has implications for
how the results come out because
drawing order will matter,
as you'll see.
Now in the second part of this routine,
I'm going to do just the
opposite of what I've done.
First, I'm going to stroke the rectangle,
then I'm going to fill it so that you
can see the difference in drawing order.
The first thing I'll do in the second
part here is to save the graphic state.
Why?
Because next I'm going to translate the
origin 200 units in the X direction.
So that's what I'll have.
Now when I start drawing,
it's going to be with
respect to that new origin.
My stroke and fill
colors are already set,
so I'm just going to go right ahead
and call my stroking function.
And this is what I'll get.
Then I'll call the filling function,
and that's what I'll get.
Now you can compare the two.
You'll see in the case of the one on
the left that the stroke partially
obscures the filled rectangle,
whereas on the right,
the filled rectangle
partially obscures the stroke.
And that has to do with how
strokes are accomplished in quartz.
Okay, now finally I'm going
to restore my state,
my graphic state,
and that will push the origin back
over to where it was to begin with.
So if I want to do any other drawing,
it's been reset that way.
Okay,
with that I'd like to bring David up,
and he's going to show
you a lot more code,
starting with images.
Thanks, Bunny.
And the microphone works?
Great.
I'm used to being a utility
infielder and coming off the bench,
so here I am.
And we're going to talk about
drawing an image from a file.
Bunny's already talked about
some of the capabilities of
Quartz for drawing images.
And I want to show you
how easy it is to do.
So these are the functions we're going
to use in our code to draw an image.
This function here,
CGImageSourceCreateWithURL,
is a function to create
an image source object.
That Quartz-- it provides a way
to get at image data that may be
on disk or in some other manner.
This function is to get
at data that's on disk.
Once we have an image source,
we can create from that
image source a CGImageObject,
a CGImageRef.
CGImageObjects are what Quartz uses
to represent an individual image.
And once we have an image,
we can draw it with CGContextDrawImage.
So let's take a look at
some code that does that.
This is just going to read an image
from a URL and draw it to the context
that's passed into the function.
First thing we do is we create
an image source from that URL.
We have a Quartz object
that we've created.
The next line of code is to create
an image from that image source.
Now, image sources can contain a
wide variety of types of data.
For example, JPEG, PNG,
the data formats that
Bunny's already talked about.
There's a lot of image
sources that are supported.
Some of those image sources can contain
more than one image in the image source.
So I don't know if you went to
the resolution-independent user
interface talk earlier this week,
but for example,
it was recommended that you supply
multiple TIF images in a TIF file,
for example, as a